# An Interesting Debt Twist (Wed 06 Dec 2017)

So we're living in a time where a some interesting languages are
showing up. Currently in mind, I have Rust, though this post is not
about Rust directly, and my opinion about Rust might not be totally
well received by anyone reading this.

With the current state of the language, I look at Rust as something
that fills a gap between scripting languages and performant
implementations. (Ouch. Please don't hate me :)).

And (anecdotaly) looking at the state of the Ruby ecosystem it seems
common to want to replace some software with Rust alternatives. For
example even skylight, a tool which is used to profile Rails
applications is written in Rust.

However, I finally gave a shot at a language called Crystal. It's a
language that extremely resembles Ruby, but is compiled and garbage
collected. Let me stress the resemblance: you can almost run a Ruby
script without changing anything in most cases. This raises an
interesting question: how effortlessly can I migrate a Ruby project
into Crystal, and what are the benefits if any?

By benefits, I'm talking about memory footprint and perhaps even cpu
usage.

## Testing Topics

String manipulation, socket/http use, threading, crypto somewhat.

Source diff line counts to see how many changes were required from the
original Ruby project (stlkr) to swap to the Crystal project
(stlkr-cr).

## Methodology

I had written a small project called `stalker`, that `GET`s urls on
certain websites, hashes the contents, and notifies you when things
had changed. This was especially handy in university when you had to
check certain professor's webpages which would secretly update without
other means of notifications. It's an old piece which was bloated with
some irrelevant libraries for this small case study.

The first step is to remove the above, and keep something clean, free
of libraries such as libnotify and GTK.

When things are ready, we fork the project, and begin the conversion
to Crystal. This is to keep history in git, and extract metrics in the
future.

## Measurements of Interest

- Diff line count to migrate to Crystal
- Memory
- CPU usage

## Further Questions

## Similar projects

Cython?
